feature(docs): frontend detailed architecture (#2)
xoscar/image-store: frontend/README.md

# In-Depth Frontend Architecture

In this part of the documentation is focused on the nitty and gritty around the front end architecture, discussing the following topics:

1. Scaffolding & Folder Structure
2. State Management
3. Entities, Standards and How Tos
4. Rendering the Home page
5. Unit and End to End tests

## Scaffolding & Folder Structure

### Next.js template

The first thing to consider will be the starting point of the application. In this case as we want to use `Typescript` as the main tool and type safety, we can choose this [next.js template](https://nextjs.org/docs/basic-features/typescript) which has the pre-installed toolset to work with `Typescript`.

### Why Typescript?

> Typescript has become a no-brainer in the Javascript word because of its easy of use, flexibility and extensive toolkit for type safety approaches. Using Vanillay JS can be often difficult when it comes to having an easy way to understand how different parts of the system interact with each other, if you have I/O operations using type checks you can understand the expected information that is going to flow through, and not just guess based on a few tries.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Typescript has become a no-brainer in the Javascript word because of its ease of use, flexibility and extensive toolkit for type safety approaches. Using Vanilla JS can often be difficult when it comes to having an easy way to understand how different parts of the system interact with each other, if you have I/O operations using type checks you can understand the expected information that is going to flow through, and not just guess based on a few tries.
```

> Another keypoint for React is that in case you want to support something similar like PropTypes, you might end up adding extra overhead to components and not only that but PropTypes are only targeted for React Components and will leave the rest of the app with any possible type check.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Another keypoint for React is that in case you want to support something similar like PropTypes, you might end up adding extra overhead to components and not only that but PropTypes are only targeted for React Components and will leave the rest of the app without any possible type check.
```

#### Downsides

> Can cause some initial overhead issues to structure the required types and having the team used to using the tool.

Reviewer: Can you add a little right here about any experiences you've had with a team transitioning from vanilla JS to TypeScript? If you have a team that's not used to using the tool what does the ramp-up look like?

### Folder Structure

> React is a really powerful library that allows you to build great Frontend applications, the problem is that it doesn't provide an strict standard on how to structure the application directories, in this case leaving the developers decide what's best for their use case.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
React is a really powerful library that allows you to build great Frontend applications, the problem is that it doesn't provide a strict standard on how to structure the application directories, in this case leaving the developers to decide what's best for their use case.
```

> In this case, the most common and well known pattern is the container-component one, which defines a standard on how to distribute the code across the project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The most common and well known pattern is container-component, which defines a standard on how to distribute the code across the project.
```

> For Next.js it includes already a predefined structure that allows you to follow this pattern from the beginning, you can define `pages` as top level components(containers) and the rest of the three can be part of the `components` folder.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next.js already includes a predefined structure that allows you to follow this pattern from the beginning, you can define `pages` as top level components (containers) and the rest can be part of the `components` folder.
```

Directories diagram

```
/image-store
  /pages
  /components
  /types
  /providers
  /utils
  /models
  /hooks
  /gateways
  /constants
  /services
  /assets
```

#### Downsides

1. Even if this is a well-known pattern, it might cause some issues in the long run when it comes to considering what makes a reusable component truly reusable.
2. There is a fine line between a container and a component since the inclusion of Context API and hooks.

### Naming Conventions

> A big part of having a good development experience while working on an application is to been able to identify files quickly, understanding what each file means and having an simple way to add more to the project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A big part of having a good development experience while working on an application is to be able to identify files quickly, understanding what each file means and having a simple way to add more to the project.
```

In this case, I believe that having the entity type attached clearly to the filename can be really helpful, the following table shows how each filename should be constructed based on the type.

| Type      | FileName                                   |
| --------- | ------------------------------------------ |
| Component | Image.tsx                                  |

> | Provider  | NameOrThe.provider.tsx, Image.provider.tsx |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Provider  | NameOfThe.provider.tsx, Image.provider.tsx |
```

| Types     | NameOfThe.type.ts, Images.types.ts         |
| Gateways  | NameOfThe.gateway.ts, Images.gateway.ts    |
| Models    | NameOfThe.model.ts, Image.model.ts         |
| Constants | NameOfThe.constants.ts, Image.constants.ts |
| Hooks     | useImage.ts(x)                             |
| Utils     | Common.utils.ts                            |
| Services  | NameOfThe.service.ts(x), Image.service.ts  |

> | Styles    | Image.styled.ts, Modal.styles.ts           |

Reviewer: I'm curious what would differentiate `*.styled.*` from `*.styles.*` here? Also, why are some of the extensions in this table `.ts` while others are `.tsx` and what would drive the decision on which extension to use? Questions like this should be answered in the document, not in the comments on the PR.

#### Downsides

- Names can become quite long

> - For some types you have to break the naming convention to follow the framework standards (next.js pages/ react hooks)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- For some types you have to break the naming convention to follow the framework standards (next.js pages, react hooks)
```

### Exporting/Importing a module

> When it comes to exporting a module, that could be from a React Component, Provider, Gateways, etc. We want to focus on two main points:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When exporting a module from a React Component, Provider, Gateways, etc., we want to focus on two main points:
```

1. Avoid having to import a module from a far parent folder, similar to `../../../../../folder/Component/Component.tsx`. This can be easily fixed by configuring `Typescript` to use the root folder as an absolute path, updating the import to `folder/Component/Component.tsx`.

> 2. Having a clear entry point for the imported/exported module. To fix this, we will be using indexes files as a main entry point, each module that consist in multiple files like:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Having a clear entry point for the imported/exported module. To fix this, we will be using index files as a main entry point, each module consists in multiple files like:
```

```
/Component
 Component.tsx
 Component.style.ts
 hooks/
  useComponent.ts
```

Should include an `index.ts` file that exports the main entry point similar to:

```ts
export {default} from './Component';
```

> Allowing external modules importing it directly from the parent folder `import folder/Component`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This allows external modules to import it directly from the parent folder `import folder/Component`.
```

#### Downsides

- You'll have to include an extra `index.ts` file for each module.

## State Management

There is a big debacle in the React community about the usage of different state management tools, the biggest issue is when and why you should consider using one.

> And I believe the topic hot even more complex after the addition of Providers and hooks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
I believe the hot topic is even more complex after the addition of providers and hooks.
```
Either capitalize both Providers and Hooks or capitalize neither of them, I'm not sure which is correct. In the "Pros" section under "Vanilla React" below you don't capitalize both context and hooks which makes it seem like providers is only capitalized because it's the first word in the bullet (which is correct) so my suggestion here is to capitalize neither so that you're consistent between these sections, but consider searching for these terms throughout the rest of the document to make sure you're treating them consistently.

Let's consider some of the options:

### Vanilla React

The latest versions of React provide you with tools that you can use for simple scenarios where you'll need to have some sort of state management for your application, adding it to the question of, is it really needed to have a separated library for this?

**Pros:**

- You can keep your app lightweight, as you avoid adding extra libraries to the build.

> - Reducers are nativaly supported by React and can be used for scoped portions of the app or globally depending on the use case.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Reducers are natively supported by React and can be used for scoped portions of the app or globally depending on the use case.
```

- Providers, context and hooks are great tools to spread the data across the component tree.

**Cons:**

- React still is a UI library, which doesn't include anything for I/O operations.

> - Everything is added at the lifecycle level, so functions, so handling caching across the data, functions and other data types needs to be manually handled by the developers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Everything is added at the lifecycle level, so handling caching across the data, functions and other data types needs to be manually handled by the developers.
```
You already had functions in the second item in the list so I suggested removing it. I'm not sure how you want the sentence to flow though, so maybe read this sentence a few times and adjust how you want it. Also, we should debate the Oxford comma someday. You're consistently not using it across the document, so I won't suggest it here, but I have opinions. 😉

Author: Oxford what? 😂

Author: Oxford who? 🤔

> - As great as hooks can be, it can become cumbersome to have all of your business logic encapsulated in a concept that is framework specific.

Reviewer: You're touching on a fascinating topic here, that goes deeper than just being framework specific: You mentioned a moment ago that React is a UI framework... should the business logic be in the UI at all? This is a philosophical discussion that doesn't need to be added here (arguably shouldn't be added here) but I'd love to discuss with you at some point. Devon and I have had some conversations on this as well and I think it would be fun to talk about it among the three of us.

Later edit: You actually cover this topic with the services layer, but I don't see where you've tied these concepts together in the main document. Might be worth a mention somewhere.

Author: I'm happy to explain when and why I think sometimes you can do one thing vs the other, but should it really makes sense to add it here?

Reviewer: Could go either way on that. You can leave it like it is.

### Redux-Toolkit

This is a great tool that works as a wrapper for the Redux library, it includes simpler APIs to enable fast development while still using Redux.
**Pros:**

> - Includes simple ways for I/O implementations, and auto generates hooks for you to use, it also includes caching, error handling and more.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Includes simple ways to do I/O implementations, auto generates hooks for you to use, and also includes caching, error handling and more.
```

> - You can keep using the same patterns as for Redux with Actions, Reducers if you want to keep having fine control of the state.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- You can keep using the same patterns as you did for Redux with Actions and Reducers if you want to keep having fine control of the state.
```

- Fully typed, so you can use it alongside `Typescript`.
- Side effects come out of the box by allowing cross action listeners for reducers.

**Cons:**

> - It comes with an initial overhead of learning how Redux works, as it feels targeted for old users that want a new way of interacting with he same pattern.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- It comes with an initial overhead of learning how Redux works, as it feels targeted for users already familiar with the pattern but want an easier way of interacting with the tool.
```
"old users" is accurate but comes in as a gut punch 🤣

> - Includes several tools and APIs that you wont need unless you have a specific use case, it might be considered overkill for some apps.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Includes several tools and APIs that you wont need unless you have a specific use case, might be overkill for some apps.
```

> - It includes its own custom way when creating I/O operations, in case you have generic logic you want to reuse you'll have to migrate them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- It includes its own custom way when creating I/O operations, if you have generic logic you want to reuse you'll have to migrate it.
```

### React-Query

> React query is an I/O abstraction that allows you create custom logic to connect to an API while also provides its own state management.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
React query is an I/O abstraction that allows you create custom logic to connect to an API while also providing its own state management.
```

**Pros:**

- Allows you to decouple the actual API call from the React code, having your generic gateways doing the job.

> - Native support for queries, mutations, paginated queries and more.

Reviewer: Instead of telling me there's more... tell me more. Add bullets, or items in the list, whatever. If it's overwhelming evidence that it's the best choice lay out the evidence. Don't be scared or limited to 3 bullet points because someone told you that's what you _should_ have.

> - Includes a tagging system for cache, so you can decide when to refetch certain queries.

Reviewer: Selectively cache-busting is ❤️ !

**Cons:**

> - It doesn't include a custom state management.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- It doesn't include custom state management.
```

> - It still uses hooks a primary API.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- It still uses hooks as a primary API.
```

### Decision

> Having worked on big enterprise level React apps and at the same time on smaller code bases, there are some compromises that you need to do based on the team, state of the business and overall development experience.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Having worked on enterprise-level React apps and at the same time on smaller code bases, there are some compromises that you need to do based on the team, state of the business and overall development experience.
```
Saying "enterprise-level" implies big. Also, there's a lot of places I would put hyphens throughout this document but I left them out because they're a little pedantic for what we're doing here, but I included here because I was already making another suggestion.

> I believe that having overkill startegies when is not necessary can be as harmful as not having them when its necessary as it can slow the development process by adding extra overhead or quirks just to support something that can be simply done by just using React.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
I believe that having overkill startegies when not necessary can be as harmful as not having them when it is necessary as it can slow the development process by adding extra overhead or quirks just to support something that can be simply done by just using React.
```

> In this case the best combination for a small app like this, I believe that a combination of React's core state management system like hooks, providers, context, etc. Combined with a simple but powerful I/O tool like `react-query` should be the best fit.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this case the best combination for a small app like this, I believe that a combination of React's core state management system like hooks, providers, context, etc. combined with a simple but powerful I/O tool like `react-query` should be the best fit.
```

As `react-query` allows you control the actual API request, you can create base gateways and custom responses (models) to use across the app, and the `providers` should be able to spread the information by custom hooks.

### State Data Structure

> As `react-query` will do the heavy lifting to keep the image state and information in memory. The thing that we need to keep track will be the list of `in-progress` uploads. In this case we'll be using a native React [reducer](https://beta.reactjs.org/reference/react/useReducer), where we are going to store a key value map for the uploads, it should look as the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`react-query` will do the heavy lifting to keep the image state and information in memory. The thing that we need to keep track of will be the list of `in-progress` uploads. In this case we'll be using a native React [reducer](https://beta.reactjs.org/reference/react/useReducer), where we are going to store a key value map for the uploads, it should look as the following:
```

```json
{
 "upload-id":  UploadModel,
 "upload-id-2":  UploadModel,
}
```

And accessing the store to write should be done by dispatching changes to `add, delete and update`.

## Design-System

> To ensure component reusability and avoid recreating the same components over and over, creating an set of initial `design-system` component which should provide the basic styles for commonly used controls like:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To ensure component reusability and avoid recreating the same components over and over, we should create a set of initial `design-system` component which should provide the basic styles for commonly used controls like:
```

1. Buttons
2. Text
3. Modals
4. Colors

### Style-Components

> The styled-component library becomes very handy when it comes to create extendible components based on a specific set of styles, it contains a `ThemeProvider` tha can be used to store the overall styling rules, like spacing, colors, fonts, etc.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The styled-component library becomes very handy when it comes to creating extendable components based on a specific set of styles, it contains a `ThemeProvider` that can be used to store the overall styling rules, like spacing, colors, fonts, etc.
```
Sometimes you're putting the library names (styled-component, react-query, etc.) in backticks and sometimes you're not, I would just suggest you do a pass for just the names and make sure you're treating them consistently.

### Storybook

The Storybook library is another great tool that can be used to create generic components while visualizing them before wiring them up with the rest of the application.

## Application Entities

- [Components](entities/Components.md)
- [Models](entities/Models.md)
- [Services](entities/Services.md)
- [Gateways](entities/Gateways.md)
- [Pages](entities/Pages.md)
- [Types](entities/Types.md)

## Rendering the Home Page

Acceptance Criteria:

AC1:
As a user landing on the main page

> I should be able to see the loading state with skeleton items

Reviewer: These don't show up in the document as multi-line even though you've written them here as multi-line. There should be other ways to do the markdown formatting that will show them as multi-line if that's your intent.

AC2:
As a user landing on the main page

> And the requests are finish loading

Reviewer: ```suggestion
And the requests are finished loading
```
Because they don't show up as multi-line on the finished document the capitalization in the middle of the sentence looks weird. I came to correct it when I realized you wrote it as multi-line here, so I won't make those corrections because I think in conjunction with dealing with the markdown formatting for multi-line you'll resolve this issue. If they're multi-line this capitalization looks good. 👍

AC4:
As a user looking at the main page
And I scroll to the bottom of the page
And I'm at the last page
I should see the no more items component

AC5:
As a user looking at the main page
I should be able to see the upload image button

AC6:
As a user looking at the main page
And I click the upload button
I should be prompted with the native controls to upload the image

AC7:
As a user looking at the main page
And I select an image from the gallery or I took a photo
I should be able to see the upload in progress
And the website should be entirely functional

AC8:
As a user looking at the main page
And I just uploaded an image
Once the upload ends
I should be able to see the updated list of images

AC9:
As a user looking at the main page
And I just uploaded an image
And I try to navigate away
I should see an alert to confirm the navigation action

### Component Tree

Pseudo code of the main page component tree:

```jsx
<Layout>
  <Navigation>
  <ImageProvider>
    <Page>
      <Main>
        <UploadInProgress>
        <UploadButton>
        <ImageList>
          <ImageCard>
          <NextPageTrigger>
```

### Pagination & Performance

> To avoid performance problems, the list of images will be paginated in chunks of 20 items, every time the user reaches the end, the skeleton/loading state should be displayed for the new section and a new set of images will be added when finish.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To avoid performance problems the list of images will be paginated in chunks of 20 items. Every time the user reaches the end the skeleton/loading state should be displayed for the new section and a new set of images will be added when finished.
```
Will you ever "unload" items to conserve memory usage on the device?

Author: I think that if you are looking from a webapp perspective, not a native app, has a backend encoding mechanism for images and also has an async load for images and pagination, you can let the browser take care of it.

    par Main Page to User
        Main Page-->>-User: Displays Skeleton List
    and Main Page to Image Provider
        User->>+Main Page: Loads Page
        Main Page->>+Image Provider: Instantiates Provider
        Image Provider->>+Image Gateway: Fetch images from API (paginated)
        Image Gateway->>+Models: Generate image models
        Models-->>-Image Gateway: Return Image Models
        Image Gateway-->>-Image Provider: Returns Images
        Image Provider-->>-Main Page: Updates Image List
        Main Page-->>-User: Renders Image list
    end
    User->>+Main Page: Clicks Upload
    Main Page-->>-User: Shows Controls
    User->>+Main Page: Selects Image
    Main Page->>+Image Provider: Triggers Upload
    Image Provider->>+Image Provider: Gets image metadata
    Image Provider->>+Image Provider: Validates File Metadata
    Image Provider->>+Models: Generates upload model
    Models-->>-Image Provider: Upload Model
    Image Provider->>+Image Provider: Updates Upload Map
    par Image Provider to Main Page
        Image Provider-->>-Main Page: Updates in progress uploads
        Main Page-->>-User: Shows In progress upload
    and Image Provider to Image Gateway

>         Image Provider->>+Image Gateway: Get Singed Url

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        Image Provider->>+Image Gateway: Get Signed Url
```

        par Image Provider to Image Provider
            Image Provider->>+Image Provider: Updates Upload Map
            Image Provider->>+Main Page: Shows Notification
            Image Provider-->>+Main Page: Updates in progress uploads
            Main Page-->>-User: Removes in progress upload
        and Image Provider to Image Gateway
            Image Provider->>+Image Gateway: Refresh List
            Image Gateway->>+Models: Generate image models
            Models-->>-Image Gateway: Image Models list
            Image Gateway-->>-Image Provider: Return Images
            Image Provider-->>+Main Page: Updates Image List
            Main Page-->>-User: Renders Image list
        end
    end
```

### Edge Cases

- What if the user selects an invalid asset type, e.g a video instead of an image? When displaying the native controls, the input should filter the assets to just accept the valid mimetypes, e.g image/jpg, image/png, etc. Aside from that, the file object should be validated before fetching the signed url.
- What happens in case the upload fails? App should display the upload status as failed and allow users to retry.

> - What happens if the user moves to another side half-way during the upload? Navigation should be blocked that way if the user wants to move away there should be an alert to confirm the action, in case the user moves away the upload is lost.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- What happens if the user moves to another site half-way during the upload? Navigation should be blocked that way if the user wants to move away there should be an alert to confirm the action, in case the user moves away the upload is lost.
```
This one is under debate for us because the back-end would still receive the full upload and resolve, we believe.

Author: So that's a requirement, having the upload continue if the user moves away from the app? I believe that feels really strange as someone looking at an ephemeral web application, you can consider things like that for electron apps or even mobile apps.

I would ask you to look at any social media platform that does that, it can be even a possible privacy issue if you upload things in the background if the user moves away.

- What happens if the name of the image is too long? The name should be part of the metadata but not the actual upload name, that way we can be sure the S3 restrictions are not broken.
- What if the asset is to big? Frontend should read the size of the file and validate if its something that can be uploaded, the backend should also specify the max size upload when signing the url, in case the asset is too big the upload will throw an error that should be displayed by the frontend.

## Unit and End to End tests

## Tooling

### Unit testing

As mentioned in the [official React docs](https://reactjs.org/docs/testing.html), they recommend to using Jest alongside React testing tools, these are by far the most suitable frameworks for testing react logic and components.

> I believe tools like Enzyme or Jasmine where good at some point as workarounds when it comes to DOM manipulation and such, I think the simplest way today is to go with Jest plus React Testing Tools.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
I believe tools like Enzyme or Jasmine were good at some point as workarounds when it comes to things like DOM manipulation, but I think the simplest way today is to go with Jest plus React Testing Tools.
```

### End to End tests

> For End to end Tests the most solid framework out there has to be Cypress, it natively supports Typescript so it goes along with the Frontend structure, as well as supporting multiple browser types like Chrome, Electron, Firefox, webKit, among others.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For End to end Tests the most solid framework currently is Cypress. It natively supports Typescript so it goes along with the Frontend structure, as well as supporting multiple browser types like Chrome, Electron, Firefox, WebKit, among others.
```
"End to End tests" in the header and "End to end Tests" here, your capitalization is inconsistent.

Has support for CI/CD processes where you can use the cloud version to get more insights around your tests.

It also has support for component testing but I think the feature is too new and lacks the maturity that the other tools provide.

## Testing Strategy

> For unit testing, as most of the scenario are focused on testing isolated scenarios and there tents to be some mocking, the idea should be to focus on core components that contain the most critical amount of business logic, while components just used for rendering data have the lowest priority.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For unit testing, as most of the scenarios are focused on testing isolated scenarios and there tends to be some mocking the idea should be to focus on core components that contain the most critical amount of business logic, while components just used for rendering data have the lowest priority.
```

> Base on the image store scenario, the focus should be around:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Based on the image store scenario, the focus should be around:
```

1. The provider as it handles the stage management and interacts with the gateways
2. Gateways to validate edge cases and model factories

> For End to End Test a simple way to understanding what to test is going through the acceptance criteria, usually the requirements described there help understand what is exactly the expected behavior.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For End to End Tests a simple way to understand what to test is going through the acceptance criteria, usually the requirements described there help understand what the expected behavior is exactly.
```

In this case we can go with:

1. Uploading an Image
2. Displaying the image list (validating pagination)

> 3. Cancel an Upload

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Canceling an Upload
```

```json
{
 "upload-id":  UploadModel,
 "upload-id-2":  UploadModel,
}
```

And accessing the store to write should be done by dispatching changes to `add, delete and update`.

## Design-System

To ensure component reusability and avoid recreating the same components over and over, creating an set of initial `design-system` component which should provide the basic styles for commonly used controls like:

1. Buttons
2. Text
3. Modals
4. Colors

### Style-Components

The styled-components library becomes very handy when it comes to create extendible components based on a specific set of styles, it contains a `Themeprovider` tha can be used to store the overall styling rules, like spacing, colors, fonts, etc.

### Storybook

The Storybook library is another great tool that can be used to create generic components while visualizing them before wiring them up with the rest of the application.

> ## Application Entities

Reviewer: Missing a link to your Providers section here.
